Document the properties of a high quality OSV record (#2193)
google/osv.dev: docs/data_quality.md

# Properties of a High Quality OSV Record

## Version

1.0.0 (SEMVER)

## Purpose

Describe the “good enough” OSV record that will be imported by OSV.dev

### Out of scope

This does not discuss the problem of record bit rot over time, after initial successful import. The problem of continuous revalidation and treatment of records that have been successfully imported will be dealt with separately in the companion to this, *Managing the Perishability of OSV Records*.

Deferred to a future iteration: validating the existence of vulnerable functions in the `ecosystem_specific` field, if supplied.

## Audience

1. OSV record producers
2. Downstream OSV.dev record consumers

## Rationale

> OSV.dev seeks to be a comprehensive, accurate and timely database of known vulnerabilities that is highly automation friendly. In order to meet this accuracy goal, a quality bar needs to be both defined and sustainably enforced.

Reviewer: Just out of curiosity given that it can't be sustainably enforced for OSV records coming from OSS-Fuzz (https://github.com/google/osv.dev/issues/2176) I wonder if they will no longer be imported (automatically)? If so I can probably close https://github.com/google/osv.dev/pull/2222.

Reviewer: Got it. As far as I understand it should be addressed in https://github.com/google/osv.dev/issues/2188 one way or another. Until then it would maybe make sense to mention that the quality bar isn't enforced yet. It should hopefully help to prevent treating all OSV entries as vulnerabilities. I'm 99% sure that bogus CVEs based on OSV data popped up because the OSV database was (and still is) advertised in a way that doesn't (always) match reality.

Reviewer 2: I think this discussion is separate to the intention of this document here. 

This document is meant to serve as a reference for how to properly structure and format an OSV record. It doesn't go into whether or not a record is worthy of being considered a vulnerability. That would be a separate discussion :)

Reviewer: > It doesn't go into whether or not a record is worthy of being considered a vulnerability

Currently the documentation says "It is also assumed that the vulnerability discussed in the OSV record is valid and affects the software described" and looking at https://github.com/google/osv.dev/pull/2193#discussion_r1621508490 I think it implies that OSV records are vulnerabilities.

Either way I agree that this discussion can be moved elsewhere. Just to clarify I think OSS-Fuzz is great and OSV is great. It's just that they don't interact well with each other yet and get misused from time to time by some organizations.

## Properties of a High Quality OSV Record

### Valid

As a prerequisite, it is assumed that a record passes [JSON Schema validation](#appendix-a-osv-schema-validation) for the version of the [OSV Schema](https://ossf.github.io/osv-schema/) it declares itself to comply with in the `schema_version` field, or 1.0.0 if it does not. It is also assumed that the vulnerability discussed in the OSV record is valid and affects the software described.

### Precise

A high quality OSV record allows a consumer of that record to be able to answer the following questions in an **automated** way, at scale:

* "Does this vulnerability, as described, impact me?"
  * "What version do I need to upgrade to, or what patches do I need to apply, for it not to impact me?"
  * "Should I replace or remove this (potentially orphaned) package with known unfixed vulnerabilities?"

> The definition of “impact” will vary depending on how fine-grained the information available is (i.e. package-level or symbol-level for software library packages). Package-level precision is the minimum standard.

Reviewer 2: nit: the quotes ion this line are smart quotes (both left quotes).

Author: Addressed in bd9dcbfc

* for version and commit ranges
  * `affected[]`.`ranges[]`.`events[]`.`introduced` is defined
  * prefer `affected[]`.`ranges[]`.`events[]`.`fixed` over `affected[]`.`ranges[]`.`events`.`last_affected`
    * this minimizes false negatives
  * distinct ranges for `introduced..fixed` and/or `introduced..last_affected` *(i.e. introduced and fixed versions or commits can't be the same)*

>   * values in `introduced` are before/less than `fixed`/`last_affected` according to the canonical package registry or repository

Reviewer 2: nit: "project version control" is more precise than "repository" which is a bit overloaded.

Author: Addressed in bd9dcbfc

* the `package.ecosystem`, and a unique `identifier` prefix for it, are defined in the OSV Schema
* the `package.name` exists within the defined `package.ecosystem`, and is canonically encoded to be unambiguous *(i.e. normalized)*
* Package URLs in the `package.url` field conform to the [specification](https://github.com/package-url/purl-spec)
* `reference` URLs return a 2xx or 3xx response at the time of publication

### Identifiable

* Where relevant, an `alias` to the equivalent CVE record is present
* Where an OSV record consolidates multiple vulnerabilities in another ecosystem (or universe), multiple `related` identifiers are present

## Examples

* [GO-2024-2687](https://api.osv.dev/v1/vulns/GO-2024-2687)
  * Has `introduced` and `fixed` versions
  * Has an alias to a CVE record ID
  * Has a purl
* [OSV-2024-98](https://api.osv.dev/v1/vulns/OSV-2024-98)
  * Has `introduced` and `fixed` commits
    * commits exist in repo
* [DSA-5678-1](https://api.osv.dev/v1/vulns/DSA-5678-1)
  * Has `introduced` and `fixed` versions
  * Has multiple `related` CVE record IDs

## Appendix A: OSV Schema validation

> (As at version 1.6.3, generated by Gemini)

Reviewer 2: nit: let's say "generated by Gemini from the JSON schema" ?

Author: Addressed in bd9dcbfc

**Top-Level Information:**

* **id:** A unique string identifier for the vulnerability.

> * **modified:** A timestamp (in a specific format) indicating when the vulnerability information was last updated.

Reviewer 2: nit: let's be precise here: RFC3339-formatted timestamp in UTC (ending in "Z").

Author: Addressed in bd9dcbfc

**Optional, but validated when present:**

* **schema\_version:** A string specifying the version of the schema being used.

> * **published/withdrawn:** Timestamps for when the vulnerability was published or withdrawn.

Reviewer 2: nit: let's be precise here: RFC3339-formatted timestamp in UTC (ending in "Z").

Author: Addressed in bd9dcbfc

* **severity:** An array of objects detailing the severity using different scoring systems (e.g., CVSS v2, v3, or v4), if available.
* **affected:** An array of objects describing which packages are affected, including details like:
  * **package:** The ecosystem (e.g., npm, PyPI), name, and Package URL (PURL) of the affected package.
  * **severity:** Severity for the specific package (if different from the overall severity).
  * **ranges:** Information on the affected version ranges, commit ranges, or ecosystem-specific identifiers.
  * **versions:** A list of specific affected versions.
  * **ecosystem\_specific/database\_specific:** Additional data specific to the package ecosystem or the vulnerability database.
* **references:** An array of objects providing URLs to external resources about the vulnerability, categorized by type (e.g., advisory, article, discussion).
* **credits:** An array of objects giving credit to individuals or organizations involved in discovering, reporting, or fixing the vulnerability.
* **database\_specific:** A flexible object for any extra information specific to the database using this schema.

**Additional Validation Rules:**

> * **timestamp:** A custom definition that ensures timestamps adhere to a specific date-time format (e.g., "2023-11-15T12:34:56Z").

Reviewer 2: RFC:

Author: Addressed in 2e954725

* **additionalProperties: false:** This prevents any extra properties from being added to the JSON object beyond those defined in the schema.
* **Specific Requirements in `affected` Array:
  * There are conditional validations based on the `type` of range, ensuring the correct properties are present (e.g., `repo` is required when `type` is `GIT`).
  * A logical check ensures that if `last_affected` is specified in `events`, then `fixed` cannot be present in the same `events` array.

> **Overall:**

Reviewer 2: nit: this part is probably redundant for this doc.

Author: Removed in 2e954725

# Properties of a High Quality OSV Record

## Version

1.0.0 (SEMVER)

## Purpose

Describe the “good enough” OSV record that will be imported by OSV.dev

### Out of scope

> This does not discuss the problem of record bit rot over time, after initial successful import. The problem of continuous revalidation and treatment of records that have been successfully imported will be dealt with separately in .

Author: Good catch, thank you. I have another document that is a work in progress. I'll mention it here.

Deferred to a future iteration: validating the existence of vulnerable functions in the `ecosystem_specific` field, if supplied.

## Audience

1. Current and aspiring OSV record producers
2. Downstream OSV.dev record consumers

## Rationale

OSV.dev seeks to be an comprehensive, accurate and timely database of known vulnerabilities (that is highly automation friendly). In order to meet this accuracy goal, a quality bar needs to be both defined and sustainably enforced.

## Properties of a High Quality OSV Record

> ### Valid

Reviewer 3: nit, but It's probably also worth adding that the issue in the record itself is valid.

Author: I'm sorry, I'm not understanding what you're saying here. Could you perhaps make a suggested change to the content to clarify?

Reviewer 3: Sure thing. Added one here
https://github.com/google/osv.dev/pull/2193/files#r1621522388

The idea is to state explicitly that lies/untruths/etc... are not high quality.

Author: Thanks!

> As a prerequisite, it is assumed that a record passes [JSON Schema validation](#appendix-a-osv-schema-validation) for the version of the OSV Schema it declares itself to comply with in the `schema_version` field, or 1.0.0 if it does not.

Reviewer 3: ```suggestion
As a prerequisite, it is assumed that a record passes [JSON Schema validation](#appendix-a-osv-schema-validation) for the version of the OSV Schema it declares itself to comply with in the `schema_version` field, or 1.0.0 if it does not. It is also assumed that the vulnerability discussed in the OSV record is valid and affects the software described.
```

Author: Got it, thanks! I agree. This is difficult to programmatically validate, though...

Reviewer 3: > This is difficult to programmatically validate, though...

Ya.... there is that.

### Precise

A high quality OSV record allows a consumer of that record to be able to answer the following questions in an **automated** way, at scale:

* “Does this vulnerability, as described, impact me?

>   * “What version do I need to upgrade to for it not to impact me?” 

Reviewer 3: Does this imply that OSV records with no fix version fail to be high quality?
eg. If an vuln has not been fixed

Author: That's a very fair point, and highlights the assumption that _most_ vulnerabilities have a fix available, which statistically, I would say is the case?

Do you think this assumption should be explicitly stated?

Reviewer 3: You're probably right that most vulns do have fixes, but it seems odd to me that a legitimate advisory about some abandoned software cannot be "high quality".

Another case to consider would be an advisory which was published before a fix is available (log4j comes to mind).

Reviewer 4: Example: around a third of RUSTSEC advisories are for unmaintained crates (https://osv.dev/list?q=RUSTSEC&ecosystem=crates.io), which have no fixed version.

Author: I agree with @chrisbloom7, it was not my intention to exclude or otherwise define unfixed vulnerabilities as not of high quality. They are a legitimate class of known vulnerability. I have sought to address the valuable feedback here in 247f7712, PTAL.

The definition of “impact” will vary depending on how fine-grained the information available is (i.e. package-level or symbol-level for software library packages). Package-level precision is the minimum standard.

> #### Properties
> 

Reviewer 5: Forgive this nit, but the markdown linter in me demands that I at least suggest it

Both the `Precise` and `Identifiable` sections include `Property` subheadings, while their sibling `Valid` does not. Most markdown linters will complain if you have two headings with the same values, even if they are at different levels or are children of different parents. I would argue we don't need the the subheadings at all since the parent section of `Precise`, `Identifiable`, and `Property` already includes the word: `Properties of a High Quality OSV Record`

```suggestion
```

Author: I salute your pedantry as a fellow pedant 😄

* for version and commit ranges
  * `affected[]`.`ranges[]`.`introduced` is defined
  * prefer `affected[]`.`ranges[]`.`fixed` over `affected[]`.`ranges[]`.`last_affected`
    * this minimizes false negatives
  * distinct ranges for `introduced..fixed` and/or `introduced..last_affected` *(i.e. introduced and fixed commits can't be the same)*

>   * values in `introduced` are before/less than `fixed`/`last_affected`

Reviewer 5: This opens the door to the quagmire of "according to whom?" because of how bad humans are at labeling things in the absence of strictly enforced semantic versioning. Could we add some kind of qualifier here that covers the endless nuances of the potential answers? (Consider this a starting suggestion - I defer to others if there's a better/more succinct way to describe the authoritative source)

```suggestion
  * values in `introduced` are before/less than `fixed`/`last_affected` according to the canonical package registry
```

> * for version (`ECOSYSTEM` and `SEMVER`) ranges
>   * the versions exist in the specific package ecosystem
> * for commit (`GIT`) ranges
>   * the commits exist in the specified `repo` *(i.e. they are not from another GitHub fork)*

Reviewer 5: These two parent bullets had me confused since they read like `case` statements with the one about `for version and commit ranges`. Really the latter two are a subset of the first parent bullet. Could we indent them since they are all related to the version ranges covered by the first bullet point?
```suggestion
  * for version (`ECOSYSTEM` and `SEMVER`) ranges
    * the versions exist in the specific package ecosystem
  * for commit (`GIT`) ranges
    * the commits exist in the specified `repo` *(i.e. they are not from another GitHub fork)*
```

* the `package.ecosystem`, and a unique `identifier` prefix for it, are defined in the OSV Schema

> * the `package.name` exists within the defined `package.ecosystem, and is canonically encoded for unambiguity *(i.e. normalized)*

Reviewer 5: ```suggestion
* the `package.name` exists within the defined `package.ecosystem`, and is canonically encoded to be unambiguous *(i.e. normalized)*
```

> * Package URLs in the `package.url` field in conform to the [specification](https://github.com/package-url/purl-spec)

Reviewer 5: ```suggestion
* Package URLs in the `package.url` field conform to the [specification](https://github.com/package-url/purl-spec)
```

> * `reference` URLs return a 2xx or 3xx response

Reviewer 5: Cover for bitrot?

```suggestion
* `reference` URLs return a 2xx or 3xx response at the time of publication
```

### Identifiable

> #### Properties
> 

Reviewer 5: Same as above

> Forgive this nit, but the markdown linter in me demands that I at least suggest it
> 
> Both the `Precise` and `Identifiable` sections include `Property` subheadings, while their sibling `Valid` does not. Most markdown linters will complain if you have two headings with the same values, even if they are at different levels or are children of different parents. I would argue we don't need the the subheadings at all since the parent section of `Precise`, `Identifiable`, and `Property` already includes the word: `Properties of a High Quality OSV Record`

```suggestion
```

* **references:** An array of objects providing URLs to external resources about the vulnerability, categorized by type (e.g., advisory, article, discussion).
* **credits:** An array of objects giving credit to individuals or organizations involved in discovering, reporting, or fixing the vulnerability.
* **database\_specific:** A flexible object for any extra information specific to the database using this schema.

**Additional Validation Rules:**

* **timestamp:** A custom definition that ensures timestamps adhere to a specific date-time format (e.g., "2023-11-15T12:34:56Z").
* **additionalProperties: false:** This prevents any extra properties from being added to the JSON object beyond those defined in the schema.
* **Specific Requirements in `affected` Array:
  * There are conditional validations based on the `type` of range, ensuring the correct properties are present (e.g., `repo` is required when `type` is `GIT`).
  * A logical check ensures that if `last_affected` is specified in `events`, then `fixed` cannot be present in the same `events` array.

**Overall:**

> This schema enforces a consistent and detailed structure for representing open source vulnerabilities, including information about affected packages, severity assessments, references, and credits. It helps ensure that the data is accurate and comprehensive while remaining flexible enough to accommodate various package ecosystems and additional data specific to the database using the schema.

Reviewer 5: Was this part auto generated as well? I'm not sure it's helpful here. Perhaps we could just link back to the schema. I don't see a reference to it elsewhere in this doc and it seems like a good thing to point users to at least once.

Author: Yes, it was a Gemini-generated summary of the schema. @oliverchang had suggested some sort of summary be added to this document, and I thought Gemini did a pretty good job of it? 

Additionally explicitly linking to the schema is a good call, and I've added that in 70e02b6f
